mia: < in Hebrew, feminine conjugation > You are crazy.
< in Hebrew, masculine conjugation > You are crazy.
So, my mother’s whole family was characterized as crazy.
She had a deep, deep mistrust of, uh,
mental health professionals and doctors.
When I… started to embark on my healing journey
and when I would attempt to assert, you know,
healthy boundaries or to resist relational patterns
or dynamics that produced harm or violence,
my mom would always blame my therapists.
And I guess, in a way, I understand why,
because there was no way for me to represent to a therapist
the whole story of my mother’s life,
why she was the way she was.
There were reasons.
There were reasons. I think that my mother, being the product of her family of
origin, her family of origin being so shaped
by war and displacement and genocide,
um, there’s a, you know, there’s a generation there…
the generation that had to find ways to proceed with life after horror,
with the memory of horror.
And how do you live with that?
Where do you take that? What do you do with it?
How do you accept the fact that you are still alive?
That generation… swallowed everything up,
into their bodies and into their… psyches.
Those… experiences are too big to live in single human bodies,
so they swallow everything when we try to swallow them.
Mental health and the impacts of trauma,
in the narrative of… in the narrative of my family,
has often, if not always, been divorced from context.
Our behaviours, our utterances of madness
become divorced from the circumstances out of which they needed to arise,
often as strategies for survival.
But context and justification, uh, are not
synonymous. And I think that’s where we differ.
The context doesn’t justify the outcomes...
But I suppose that I am in a much more privileged state
than my mother ever was,
wherein mental health is not as stigmatized.
My mother’s inability to… unwillingness… fear…
of addressing these experiences…
everything she could, she put into her music.
She was a violinist and it all went there.
And what a gift, to have had such a vehicle,
such a place to wordlessly express… to… to…
wordlessly empty out that which is far too vast
for human language to contain.